---
layout: default
headline: We have several opportunities for students.
title: Erik M. Ferragut | Student Opportunities
---

<p>The Cyber Security Institute at ORNL is an annual 10-week research
initiative in which talented graduate and undergraduate students in
computer science, mathematics, and related fields are invited to
tackle real-world problems in cyber security.  The Institute includes
focused introductions to relevant cyber security topics, helping
students get off to a quick start.  Students work directly with ORNL's
cyber security research scientists on ongoing projects that may
include, for example, exploiting software and hardware
vulnerabilities, modeling and simulation of cyberspace, algorithm
development and testing, and social network analysis.</p>

<p>The breadth and depth of the cyber security problem space contains
many complex and rewarding scientific challenges.  We invite students
who welcome such challenges to apply.  The program is interested in
helping students learn to contribute to the cyber security research
community.  Accordingly, each student is expected to produce a
publication-quality paper with their mentor and present their findings
at the end of the summer.</p>

<h4>About ORNL</h4> Oak Ridge Nationalâ€©Laboratory is the US Department
of Energy's largest science and energy laboratory.  ORNL has more than
4,600 staff, and annually hosts approximately 3,000 guest researchers
for two weeks or longer.  One of ORNL's missions is national security
(including cyber security).  See the ORNL web pages for more details
<a href="http://www.ornl.gov">ORNL </a> and <a
href="http://www.csiir.ornl.gov">CSIIR</a>).

<h4>Qualifications</h4> The Cyber Security Institutes seeks talented
and motivated students who are eager to apply their scientific and
problem-solving skills to critical problems in cyber security.
Students should be prepared to learn new material as provided by
mentors.  Computer programming skills, oral and written communication
skills, and problem solving skills are required.  Capability and
interest in mathematics, computer networking, cyber security,
information visualization, and machine learning will also be useful.

* Must be a US Citizen and be at least 18 years old
* Must have completed two years of undergraduate education (graduate students may apply)
* Must have a cumulative GPA of 3.0 or higher

<h4>How to Apply</h4> Applicants do not apply directly the Cyber
Security Institute, but rather to one or more of the programs that
sponsor students at ORNL.  These are <a
href="http://computing.ornl.gov/internships/rams/">RAMS</a>, <a
href="http://www.scied.science.doe.gov/ScieEd/ERULF/about.html>SULI</a>,
and <a href="http://www.orau.gov/hereatornl/">HERE</a>.  Students in
other programs (e.g., <a href="https://www.sfs.opm.gov/">DHS</a> cyber
interns) are also eligible.  Students must indicate their interest in
the Cyber Security Institute by emailing its director, Erik Ferragut.
Opportunities are also available in Fall and Spring semesters.

>   Erik M. Ferragut, Ph.D. (efn (at) ornl (dot) gov)

>   Applied Research Mathematician and Director, Cyber Security Institute

>   Oak Ridge National Laboratory


